---
title: Bid Euchre
---

The following rules are specific to how the game of “cards" was played in my family in southeast
Michigan. It’s essentially a single-deck 4-player Bid Euchre with no joker.

**Note to uninitiated readers:** the game described here is different enough from what most people
know as Euchre that if you learn this game and then invite some Midwesterners to play "Euchre", you
will be met with unfortunate confusion. Learn more about conventional Euchre
[here](https://www.pagat.com/euchre/euchre.html), and about other variations of Bid Euchre
[here](https://www.pagat.com/euchre/bideuch.html).

_Published in memory of John Magiera, Euchre King of the lake cottage._

# Players

Four players, in two teams of two. Each player sits on one side of a square table, partners sitting
across from each other. As this is a friendly Midwestern game, the players decide among themselves
the seats, partnerships, scorekeeper, and the first dealer. The scorekeeper keeps score for both
teams using pen and paper.

# Game Structure and Object

Euchre is a trick-taking game. Each round consists of the following phases: Dealing, Bidding, the
Play, and Scoring. Successive rounds are played until one team wins the game by reaching 32 points.

# Cards

The game is played with a deck of 24 conventional American playing cards, consisting of **A**,
**K**, **Q**, **J**, **10**, **9** in each of the four suits. Half of a pinochle deck is usually
used, to avoid uneven wear on a 52-card deck.

Each round, one of the four suits is selected to be trump, which outranks the other three suits for
the purpose of winning tricks. The rank of cards within each suit is as follows:

- In the non-trump suits, the rank is (from high to low): **A**, **K**, **Q**, **J**, **10**, **9**
  (with the exception that the suit of the same color as trump is missing its **J** – see below).
- In the trump suit, the jack of the trump suit is the highest trump (known as the _right bower_),
  followed by the jack of the other suit of the same color as the trump (_left bower_). Thus, the
  seven cards in the trump suit are ranked as follows: **J** (_right_), **J** (_left_), **A**,
  **K**, **Q**, **10**, **9**.

### Example

When trump is spades, the seven trumps are **J**♠︎, **J**♣︎, **A**♠︎, **K**♠︎, **Q**♠︎, **10**♠︎,
**9**♠︎. _As long as spades are trump, **J**♣︎ is considered, for all purposes, a spade, not a
club_, leaving only five cards in the club suit (**A**♣︎, **K**♣︎, **Q**♣︎, **10**♣︎, **9**♣︎). The
two red suits each have the expected six cards.

# Dealing

The dealer shuffles the cards, then deals them clockwise around the table, starting with the player
to the dealer’s left (as this is a family game, the deck need not be cut after shuffling). Deal six cards to each player, in groups of 1, 2, or 3 (or any combination thereof) at the
dealer’s choosing.

### Misdeal Scenarios

In certain cases where players are dealt a "bad hand", they may reveal their hand, nullifying the
deal and obligating the dealer to re-deal all the cards.

In our play, we trigger a misdeal on one such "bad hand": if any player is dealt all four **9**s, but other house rules are possible here.

# Bidding and Selecting Trump

Starting with the player to the left of the dealer and continuing clockwise around the table, each
player has one opportunity to bid.

A bid specifies a contract: a player, if they win the bid, commits their team to win, at minimum,
the number of tricks declared in their bid, in exchange for the privilege of naming the trump suit
and leading the first card for that round.

Any number from 1 to 6 (inclusive) is a valid bid (although 1, 5, and 6 are rarely used), and
players may also pass. A player bids by speaking the number out loud, or passes by saying “pass”
and/or knocking on the table.

The first player (to the left of the dealer) may choose to bid any number or pass. Each subsequent
player must bid strictly higher than the highest bid thusfar, or else they must pass.

Once all four players have bid or passed, the player who bid the highest, having won the bid, names
any one of the four suits as trump, and the round proceeds to The Play. If all four players passed,
the cards are re-dealt by the same dealer and the bidding starts anew.

### Variations

Some communities adopt additional house rules in the Bidding phase. Our family doesn't use any of
these, but some common ones are listed here.

- The winning bidder is allowed to name "no trump", where there are no left or right bowers, leaving
  **A** high in all four suits.
- Players must bid at least a minimum value (often 3), or else pass.
- If all the preceding players passed, the dealer must make a minimum bid (often 3 or 4). This is
  similar to the _stick the dealer_ variation in conventional Euchre, but is not as necessary in Bid
  Euchre, as almost always at least one player has a strong enough hand to bid.

### Special Bids: Playing Alone

In addition to the bids described above, **a player may also bid to take all six tricks by playing
alone**. We call this _shooting the moon_, or simply "shooting". A player may do this in one of two
ways:

- The player bids to play alone after exchanging one card from their own hand with a card from their
  partner’s hand (in conventional Euchre, this exchange is often called _partner's best_). To place
  this bid, which is worth 12 points, the player dramatically lays their discard face-down on the
  table. Upon winning the bid, the player announces the trump suit, and then their partner takes the
  face-down card from the table up into their own hand. The partner then selects one of their own
  cards (presumably, the best one) and passes it face-down back to the dealer to replenish the dealer's 6-card hand.
- The player may also bid to play alone using their hand as-is. This bid is worth 24 points, and may
  be placed whether or not a player has already bid 12. A player places this bid by announcing "I'm
  going alone" and/or saying the number 24.

A bid of 12 may be subsequently raised only by a bid of 24. In exceedingly rare cases, a 24 may be
raised by a subsequent bid of 48, which, aside from the point value, behaves the same as the
24-point bid. 48 may be bid only to raise an existing bid of 24. Bids may theoretically continue to
double in this fashion.

When one of these bids is made, the partner of the winning bidder lays their hand face-down on the
table and does not participate in The Play for that round. **The lone player must take all six
tricks to fulfill the bid.**

# The Play

The player who won the Bidding leads the first trick by selecting a card from their hand and playing
it face-up in the center of the table. There are no restrictions on what card may be led. Proceeding
clockwise around the table, each of the other three players also plays a card onto the trick. These
players must _follow suit_ (play a card whose suit matches the card led) if able; if a player cannot
follow suit, they may play any other card from their hand.

Once all four players have played, the trick (the four cards that were played) is won by the player
who played the highest card of the suit led (if the trick contained no trumps) or the highest trump
(if any trumps were played). The trick is collected by either the winning player or their partner
(whichever is most convenient) and placed face-down in front of them on the table.

The player who won the trick leads the next one, and play continues in this fashion until all six
tricks have been played.

### House Rule

If a player about to lead is certain that they have the cards necessary to win all the remaining
tricks, they may lay down their hand face-up in lieu of playing out those tricks. The players verify
the hand and, if any cards are deemed not to be certain winners, the uncertain tricks are awarded to
the opposing team.

# Scoring

Once all six tricks have been played, both teams increment their score, with the winning bidder’s
team scoring first:

- If the winning bidder’s team took at least the number of tricks required by their bid, that team
  scores one point for each trick taken. If the winning bidder succeeded in taking all six tricks
  while playing alone, they score the point value of their bid (12, 24, etc.).
- If the winning bidder’s team did not succeed in taking the number of tricks required by their bid,
  they are said to be _euchred_ (or _set_), and their score decreases by the value of their bid
  (teams are allowed to have negative points).
- In both cases, the opposing team scores one point for each trick taken.

The first team to reach 32 points wins the game. If both teams reach 32 in the same round, the
winning bidder’s team scores first and thus wins the game (even if the opposing team would end up at
a higher score).

If neither team reaches 32 points, the deal passes to the left and another round is played.

# Irregularities

Euchre is a family game, and Midwesterners trust each other, so any irregularities should be handled
at the players’ discretion.
